Packaging & namespacing 
=======================

*This post is part of [The Software Architecture
Chronicles](https://herbertograca.com/2017/07/03/the-software-architecture-chronicles/)
, a [series of posts about Software
Architecture](https://herbertograca.com/category/development/series/software-architecture/)
. In them, I write about what I've learned on Software Architecture, how
I think of it, and how I use that knowledge. The contents of this post
might make more sense if you read the previous posts in this series.*

The architecture of a system is the high-level view of that system, the
big picture, the system design in broad strokes. The architectural
decisions are the structural decisions in the system, the ones that
affect the whole code base, the ones that define where everything else
will be built on top of.

Amongst other things, architecture is responsible for deciding the
systems:

-   Components
-   Relationships between components
-   Principles guiding the design and evolution of components and
    relationships

In other words, these are the design decisions that are more difficult
to change as the system evolves, it's the foundations that give support
to feature development.


**Spaghetti Architecture** 
--------------------------

Some of the projects I worked on, had a completely random structure,
they did not reflect neither the architecture nor the domain. If I would
ask " *where should I put this value object?* ", I would get an answer
like " *put it somewhere in the src folder* ". If I would ask " *where
is the Service that does this logic?* ", I would receive a " *make a
search with your IDE* ". This means there was no reasoning whatsoever to
the organisation of the project.

This is a big problem because it means there is no package modularity,
the high-level code relationships and flow does not have a logic
structure that can be followed, it leads to highly coupled and low
cohesive modules, actually it might mean that there are no modules at
all and the code that should belong in a module is scattered throughout
the code base. This is the same as saying that the code base is
**Spaghetti Code** , or maybe **Spaghetti Architecture** !

**A Maintainable codebase** 
---------------------------

Having a maintainable code base means we can apply maximum conceptual
changes with minimum code changes. In other words, when we need to apply
changes to one code unit, we should need to apply the least changes to
other code units as possible.

This gives us some very important advantages:

-   Changes are simpler because they impact on less code;
-   Changes are faster because there will be less code to change;
-   Likelihood of bugs is lower because there is less code changed;

**Encapsulation** , **Low coupling** and **High cohesion** are the
core principles that provide the code isolation that makes it possible
to have a maintainable code base. 


It's the process of concealing the internal representation and
implementation of a class. 

That is, it hides the implementation such that the internal structure
of a class is free to change without affecting the implementation of the
classes that use this particular class. 


Coupling refers to the relationship of a code unit with another code
unit. A module is said to be highly coupled with another module if
changes to it will result in changes to the other module. And a module
is said to be loosely coupled if a module is independent of any other
modules. This can be achieved by having a stable interface that
effectively hides the implementation from other modules.


-   maintainability -- changes are confined in a single module
-   testability -- modules involved in unit testing can be limited to
    a minimum
-   readability -- classes that need to be analysed are kept at a
    minimum 


Cohesion refers to the measure of how strongly-related the functions
of a module are. Low cohesion refers to modules that have different
unrelated responsibilities. High cohesion refers to modules that have
functions that are similar in many aspects.


-   Readability -- (closely) related functions are contained in a
    single module

-   Maintainability -- debugging tends to be contained in a single
    module 

-   Reusability -- classes that have concentrated functionalities are
    not polluted with useless functions 

**Impact on Structure** 
-----------------------

The previous principles are usually associated with classes, however,
they are also valid for groups of classes. Groups of classes are called
Packages in a generic way, but in a more concrete way we can call them
Modules if they have a purely functional goal (ie. ORM) and Components
if they have a Domain goal (ie. AccountManagement). This is the same
definitions as Bass, Clements and Kazman explain in their book [Software Architecture in Practice](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Architecture-Practice-SEI-Engineering-ebook/dp/B009GMUL84)

We can, and should, have packages with low coupling and high cohesion
because that will allow us to: 

-   Change one package without impacting other packages, which helps
    in having fewer bugs; 

-   Change one package without needing to change other packages, which
    helps have a higher pace of delivery; 

-   Have teams specialised in specific Packages, which makes for
    faster, less error prone and better-designed changes;
    

-   Teams can develop with fewer dependencies and conflicts between
    them, increasing productivity. 

-   Have a better reasoning over the Components relations, which will
    allow us to better model the application as a whole and therefore
    deliver a higher quality system. 

Conceptual encapsulation 
------------------------

I feel that structuring our projects in a way that reflects both the
architecture and the domain will add a lot to the maintainability of our
code base. I actually dare to go as far as stating that it is the only
way (when we deal with medium to large enterprise applications).

In a well-organised codebase, there will be only one possible location
for a specific code unit to live. We might not even know what that
location is, but there will be only one logical path leading us to it.

> **Definition of Package**
>
> By grouping classes into packages we can reason about the design at a
> higher level of abstraction. The goal is to partition the classes in
> your application according to some criteria, and then allocate those
> partitions to packages. The relationships between those packages
> expresses the high level organization of the application.
>
> Robert C. Martin 1996,
> [Granularity](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx/view)
> pp. 3

We need to aim at defining packages of conceptually related code. Those
packages are important because they define conceptually related code
units that should be isolated from other packages, and the relations
between several packages.

This is done in order to:

-   Understand the relations between code units
-   Maintain the logical relationships between code units
-   Have code packages that have low coupling and high cohesion
-   Refactor code packages, having no/minimal impact on the application
-   Swap code packages implementation, having no/minimal impact on the
    application

**Packaging Principles** 
------------------------

We can accomplish this by, amongst other principles, following the
packaging principles published by Robert C. Martin back in 1996 and
1997, mainly the **CCP** (Common Closure Principle), the **CRP** (Common
Reuse Principle), and the **SDP** (Stable Dependencies Principle).

**Packaging Principles, by Robert C. Martin:**

-   **Package Cohesion Principles**
    -   **REP** -- [The Release Reuse Equivalency
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx&hl=en)\
        *The granule of reuse is the granule of release*
    -   **CCP** -- [The Common Closure
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx&hl=en)\
        *Classes that change together are packaged together*
    -   **CRP** -- [The Common Reuse
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx&hl=en)\
        *Classes that are used together are packaged together*
-   **Package Coupling Principles**
    -   **ADP** -- [The Acyclic Dependencies
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx&hl=en)\
        *The dependency graph of packages must have no cycles*
    -   **SDP** -- [The Stable Dependencies
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgZjI3OTU4ZTAtYmM4Mi00MWMyLTgxN2YtMzk5YTY1NTViNTBh&hl=en)\
        *Depend in the direction of stability*
    -   **SAP** -- [The Stable Abstractions
        Principle](http://docs.google.com/a/cleancoder.com/viewer?a=v&pid=explorer&chrome=true&srcid=0BwhCYaYDn8EgZjI3OTU4ZTAtYmM4Mi00MWMyLTgxN2YtMzk5YTY1NTViNTBh&hl=en)\
        *Abstractness increases with stability*

**To properly use the SDP** , we should define conceptual units of code
(Components) and layers of Components, so that we know what Components
should know about (depend on) other Components.

However, if those Components boundaries are not clear, we will end up
mixing code units that should be kept ignorant of each other, coupling
them, turning them into spaghetti code and eventually in unmaintainable
code.

In order to make those boundaries explicit, we need to group together
the classes that are conceptually related into packages, the same way we
group conceptually related methods into classes. At a package level, we
can only do it using folders with conceptual names that mean something
in the domain (ie. UserManagement, Orders, Payments, ...). Only in the
last level of the structure, in its leafs, we can separate classes per
functional role (ie. Entity, Factory, Repository, ...), if needed.

> To design well decoupled components, it helps to reflect about:
>
> " *if I would want to remove this business concept, by deleting its
> component root folder would all of the business concept code be
> removed and would the remaining application not break?* "
>
> If the answer is yes, then we have a well decoupled component.

For example, in a Command Bus architecture the command and the handler
do not work one without the other, they are conceptually and
functionally bound together, so if we would need to remove that logic,
we would remove them both, and if they are in the same place, we just
remove one folder (the problem we are trying to solve is not about
deleting code, it's about having decoupled and cohesive code, but it
helps to think in these terms). So to follow the CCP and the CRP, a
command should be in the same folder as its handler.

Any code unit should only have one logical location to exist, obvious to
even a new and junior developer in the project. That will avoid
inconsistencies, lost code, duplicated code and developer
frustration. If we need to search for code because we don't know where
it is supposed to be, and/or if it is difficult to understand what code
is related to the code we are working on... then we have a bad project
structure, or worse, a bad architecture.

Screaming Architecture 
----------------------

Screaming Architecture was thought of by Robert C. Martin, and it
basically states that the project should tell us very clearly what the
system is about: its main domain. Naturally, then the first folders to
appear in the source folder should be related to domain concepts, the
top level bounded contexts (ie. patients, doctors, appointments, ...).
They should not be about the tools used by the system (ie. Doctrine,
MySQL, Symfony, Redis, ...), nor about the functional pieces of the
system (ie. repositories, views, controllers, ...), nor about delivery
mechanisms (http, console, ...).

> Your architectures should tell readers about the system, not about the
> frameworks you used in your system. If you are building a health-care
> system, then when new programmers look at the source repository, their
> first impression should be: "Oh, this is a heath-care system".
>
> Robert C. Martin 2011, [Screaming
> Architecture](https://8thlight.com/blog/uncle-bob/2011/09/30/Screaming-Architecture.html)

This is, in fact, a simpler way of thinking of the packaging principles
he had published 15 years before, and which I enunciated above. This
packaging style is also known as "Package by feature".

**Further reading** 
-------------------

2008 -- Johannes Brodwall -- [Package by
feature](http://johannesbrodwall.com/2008/07/29/link-package-by-feature/)

2012 -Johannes Brodwall -- [How Changing Java Package Names Transformed
my System
Architecture](https://dzone.com/articles/how-changing-java-package)

2012 -- sivaprasadreddy.k -- [Is package by feature approach
good?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11733267/is-package-by-feature-approach-good)

2013 -- Lahlali Issam -- [Lessons to Learn from the Hibernate Core
Implementation](http://java.sys-con.com/node/2604365)

2013 -- Manu Pk -- [Package your classes by Feature and not by
Layers](https://dzone.com/articles/package-your-classes-feature)

2015 -- Simon Brown -- [Package by component and architecturally-aligned
testing](http://www.codingthearchitecture.com/2015/03/08/package_by_component_and_architecturally_aligned_testing.html)

2015 -- César Ferreira -- [Package by features, not
layers](https://medium.com/@cesarmcferreira/package-by-features-not-layers-2d076df1964d)

2017\* -- javapractices.com -- [Package by feature, not
layer](http://www.javapractices.com/topic/TopicAction.do?Id=205)

**Sources** 
-----------

1996 -- Robert C. Martin --
[Granularity](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BwhCYaYDn8EgOGM2ZGFhNmYtNmE4ZS00OGY5LWFkZTYtMjE0ZGNjODQ0MjEx/view)

1997 -- Robert C. Martin --
[Stability](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BwhCYaYDn8EgZjI3OTU4ZTAtYmM4Mi00MWMyLTgxN2YtMzk5YTY1NTViNTBh/view)

2009 -- 500internalservererror -- [What do low coupling and high
cohesion mean? What does the principle of encapsulation
mean?](https://500internalservererror.wordpress.com/2009/02/23/what-do-low-coupling-and-high-cohesion-mean-what-does-the-principle-of-encapsulation-mean/)

2011 -- Robert C. Martin -- [Screaming
Architecture](https://8thlight.com/blog/uncle-bob/2011/09/30/Screaming-Architecture.html)

