Software Architecture Premises
==============================

In this post, I establish the very first concepts about Software
Architecture, that will be needed in order to better understand the
following posts.

**No Silver Bullets!**
----------------------

No matter how you understand what I talk about in *[The Software Architecture Chronicles](ch01.md)* , above all please understand that **there are no silver bullets** ,
there is no "*one boot fits all*" solution.  Learn as much as possible
about different approaches, understand the pros and cons of each
approach, what specific technical problem they solve.

Then, when taking on a new challenge, start by understanding the
business and end-user requirements. Only after having those requirements
clearly understood you can reason about what architectural styles and
patterns should be used to better address the problem at hand.

Finally, make your own choices, maybe implement one of the known
solutions, maybe create your own design that fits your particular
problem.

> Some architectural styles are often portrayed as 'silver bullet'
> solutions for all forms of software. However, a good designer should
> select a style that matches the needs of the particular problem being
> solved.
>
> Roy Fielding, 2000 ^[\[1\]](#01)^

**Terminology**
---------------

In the Software Development world there is plenty of ambiguity in the
terminology used and, as such, before continuing, it is important to
clarify the meaning **I** want to give to a few terms I use.

### Functional

It's any piece of code, method, class, group of classes, that has a
purely technical role in the application. It is **not related to the
domain** , it simply **represents a technical capability** in the
application. Examples:

-   Layers
-   Factories
-   Repositories
-   Value Objects
-   Views
-   ViewModels

### Conceptual

It's any piece of code, method, class, group of classes, that reflects a
domain concept in the application. It is directly **related to the
domain** , it **represents a business capability** in the application.
Examples:

-   User
-   Product
-   Stock Management
-   Product Variants
-   Checkout
-   Upsells

This separation doesn't mean that a code unit can not be referred to in
both ways (Functional and Conceptual). For example, a "Money" class can
represent a domain concept and be designed as a Value Object. If I refer
to it as a concept, I mean the domain Money concept, but if I am
referring to the Functional aspect of the class, then I mean the
technical characteristics of a ValueObject (no ID, maybe immutable,
etc).

### Package

Any set of classes grouped together, ideally following some set of rules

### Module

I use the definition given in [Software Architecture in
Practice](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Architecture-Practice-SEI-Engineering-ebook/dp/B009GMUL84)
^[\[7\]](#07)^ , which says that a module is a **functional package** ,
it **reflects a technical capability** in the application. It
is decoupled and can be swapped by another implementation. For me,
modules exist at a low granularity level, for example, a "
**Security Module** " or the " **ORM** ", but also at a higher
granularity level like **Client** and **Server** blocks of the
application. Modules provide for Functional cohesion.

### Component

I also use the definition given in [Software Architecture in
Practice](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Architecture-Practice-SEI-Engineering-ebook/dp/B009GMUL84)
^[\[7\]](#07)^ , where the authors define a  component as a **conceptual
package** reflecting a **business capability** . It is also, ideally,
decoupled from other components and modules. Examples can be " **User**
", " **Product** " or " **Checkout** ".

The most important thing to remember, though, is that, ideally, it
reflects a **bounded context** . Components provide for Conceptual
cohesion.

### Application

I see an application as the user-facing code, the UI, which is built on
top of the Components. For example, we can have a set of components on
top of which we build a web shop. This web shop, however, has a UI which
is used by the consumers browsing and buying products (storefront) and
it has another independent UI which is used by the shop administrators
to manage products, stocks, payment providers, etc (admin). Those are
two independent applications built on top of the same business
components.

### System

I think of the system as a set of applications that somehow work
together to provide functionality to a wide range of enterprise
necessities, forming an enterprise-wide system, an Enterprise
Application. These applications may or may not be built on top of the
same Components. In the previous example of a web shop, the system is
the web shop as a whole, including the two applications built on top of
the same business components (the storefront and the admin) but also
including other 3rd party applications like payment providers or
shipment providers.

### Architecture

There are many simple definitions of Software Architecture, and I think
it is good to have them, but I think it's easier to understand what it
is, and even more important, defining the deliverables of the
Architecture, what it should deliver to the project.

> Software Architecture \[...\] is the set of structures needed to
> reason about the system, which comprises software elements, relations
> among them, and properties of both.
>
> Clements et al, 2010 ^[\[6\]](http://06)^

This is how I reason about Architecture:

-   All [ technical decisions ]{style="text-decoration:underline;"} that
    are **cross-cutting to all feature development** , ie. frameworks,
    coding standards, documentation, processes, ...;
-   It's the set of [ technical decisions
    ]{style="text-decoration:underline;"} that are **difficult to change
    later** in the project ^[\[3\]](http://03)^ ;
-   It's the big picture view of the system ^[\[5\]:pp.2](#05)^ , the
    broad strokes, the **structure** , the [ components and their
    relations ]{style="text-decoration:underline;"}
    ^[\[4\]](#04)\ [\[6\]](http://06)^ ;
-   It **prepares the project for change** ^[\[5\]:pp.30](#05)^ ,
    often simply by delaying decisions to the last acceptable moment
    ^[\[5\]:pp.32](#05)^ ;
-   It **prepares the project for reuse** of components and modules
    ^[\[7\]:pp.29--35](#7)^ ;
-   It establishes **[ standards ]{style="text-decoration:underline;"}
    for consistency of results and lightweight of processes** , like
    coding standards, the development stages, continuous delivery and
    deployment;
-   It's **not the responsibility of only one person** , but of a
    *guild* of experienced developers that belong to different feature
    teams in the project.

If you are not familiar with the concept of guilds, take a look at the
*Spotify Engineering Culture* videos:

-   [Spotify Engineering Culture part
    1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GK1NDTWbkY)
-   [Spotify Engineering Culture part
    2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3rGdmoTjDc)

### Architect

He is the **guardian and promoter** of the Architecture, which is
discussed and decided as a guild. He is one of the most experienced
developers in the team/department, which happens to have the extra
responsibility of analysing high-level problems and solutions. He also
benefits from a "quality vote" when making an architectural decision.

It is important to note, though, that all developers end up
being architects to some extent, as they all need to understand the
Architecture, they all contribute to the architecture in some way, and
in the end, they all have the responsibility of maintaining the
Architecture in place.

### Ivory Tower Architect

The all mighty **Ivory Tower Architect** is the **anti-pattern** of the
Architect, one who takes upon him to decide over all issues related to
the Architecture. He castrates the other stakeholder's contributions to
the architecture, by not being open nor easily available to receive
those contributions.

**Smells of a bad Architecture (and bad code)** ^[\[8\]](#08)^
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Rigidity

Software that is rigid is software that is difficult to change because
one change will trigger the need for more and more changes. It becomes a
rabbit hole: when we think we are almost finished we find more code that
needs to be changed, dragging us into a loop with no end in sight.

### Fragility

When changed, the fragile software will break in unexpected, unrelated
and unpredictable places.

### Immobility

A design is immobile when it contains parts that could be useful in
other systems, but the effort and risk of separating them from the
original system are too great.

### Viscosity

In a  viscous system, it's much easier to do the wrong thing than to do
the right thing. It implies that it is much easier to implement a change
by making a hack than to develop it properly. [
]{style="color:#ff0000;"}

**System-wide viscosity** happens if running unit tests and/or
compilation takes a lot of time, making it likely for a developer to
bypass procedures and implement a hack without running all automated
tests.

### Needless repetition

This happens when necessary abstractions have not been made, either
because of lack of time or lack of experience. The code may not have
been literally copy-pasted but the same business rules are defined in
more than one place.

### Opacity

The code has been written in an opaque and confusing way, and we need to
dive into the methods implementations to understand what they do.

### Needless complexity

In a passionate attempt to avoid the other 6 smells, developers
introduce all sorts of abstractions and preparations for potential
future changes. Good software design is lightweight, flexible, easy to
read and understand and above all easy to change so you don't have to
try to predict all potential changes in the future.

**Sources**
-----------

\[1\] 2000 -- Roy Fielding -- [Architectural Styles and the Design of
Network-based Software
Architectures](http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdfhttp://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf)

\[2\] 2000 -- Robert C. Martin -- [Design Principles and Design
Patterns](http://www.cvc.uab.es/shared/teach/a21291/temes/object_oriented_design/materials_adicionals/principles_and_patterns.pdf)

\[3\] 2006 -- Booch, in [\[5 pg.2\]](#05)

\[4\] 2007 -- [IEEE1471](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_1471) in
[\[5 pg.2\]](#05)

\[5\] 2010 -- James Coplien, Gertrud Bjornvig -- [Lean
Architecture](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Lean-Architecture-Agile-Software-Development/dp/0470684208)

\[6\] 2010 -- Paul Clements, Felix Bachmann, Len Bass -- [Documenting
Software Architectures](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/0321552687)

\[7\]  2012 -- Len Bass, Paul Clements, Rick Kazman -- [Software
Architecture in
Practice](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Architecture-Practice-SEI-Engineering-ebook/dp/B009GMUL84)

\[8\] 2014 -- M. H. Jongerius -- [THE SEVEN DESIGN SMELLS OF ROTTING
SOFTWARE](http://mhjongerius.tumblr.com/post/61853273412/the-seven-design-smells-of-rotting-software)

\[9\] 2017\* -- Wikipedia -- Software Architecture

