# Programming Language Evolution

Programming languages themselves are not an artefact of architecture,
but I would feel that _The Chronicles of Software Architecture_ would be
missing something if I wouldn't write about it.

So, let's make a quick review of programming languages history, its
evolution and check what we can learn from it. I've added some dates to
the chapter just as a curiosity, they should be seen as rough estimates,
the important is the evolution sequence and the problems they were
trying to solve.

## **1950s -- Non-structured Programming**

Assembly \~1951

Software Development was a very obscure activity, performed in only a
few places in the world. Assembly was the hot language back then, it
used very low-level operations like "add", "sub", "goto" and manipulated
memory addresses directly. It was slow and difficult to build a simple
application. To create a simple IF statement we needed few lines of code
and for a loop, it would take more than a few lines... The possibility
of grouping and reusing pieces of code came later on, so the coding
style was very linear and code reuse was limited to copy-pasting code
within a file or between files.

## **1960s -- Structured Programming**

Algol \~1958, Fortran

Structured programming came up, introducing code blocks, constructs for
control structures (if/then/else, case, for, while, do, ...) and
sub-routines. We could, then, create more interesting code flows and,
more important, we could group code instructions and reuse it, although
with some limitations, like the sub-routines always acting on the same
global variables. It was at this time that the first ideas of
**reusability** came to practice.

## **1970s -- Procedural & Functional Programming**

Pascal \~1970, C \~1972

Procedural and functional code came to life during the 1970s. At this
point we finally had:

- **Procedures** : Set of instructions that don't return data;
- **Functions** : Set of instructions that do return data;
- **Data structures** : Records, similar to an associative array;
- **Modules** : Code files that could be imported into other code
  files.

During the 1970s was also when the term "Spaghetti code" got coined,
following Edsger W. Dijkstra letter to the Communications of the
Association for Computing Machinery (CACM) in 1968, titled "_Go To
Statement Considered Harmful_".

It was during the late 1970s that the first ideas of **Event Oriented
Programming** surfaces and Trygve Reenskaug writes his paper about MVC
(which used events).

Thus, with these improvements, we had better **reusability,** as
subroutines (procedures and functions) could perform the same logic with
different data. We could also **model domain concepts** by grouping
related data into complex data structures. And, finally, we gave the
first steps in **decoupling and modularity** where we could create code
reusable in other code files and events to decouple the client code from
the logic being executed.

## **1980s -- Object Oriented Programming**

Simula \~1965, Smalltalk-71 \~1971, C++ \~1980, Erlang \~1986, Perl
\~1987,

Python \~1991, Ruby \~1993, Delphi, Java, Javascript, PHP \~1995

Theory and [thoughts on OOP start as early as the
1960s](http://gagne.homedns.org/~tgagne/contrib/EarlyHistoryST.html),
and was [implemented for the first time during the
1960s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simula) : Simula.

Nevertheless, it was during the 1980s that the usage of the current
programming paradigm became generalized: Object Oriented Programming,
with visibility levels, methods (messages), objects, classes, and later
on packages. This is the same as saying _increased_ **_encapsulation_**
_and_ **_modularity_** :

- **Visibility levels** allow us to control what code can access a
  specific set of data;
- **Classes** allow us to define/model domain concepts;
- **Objects** allow us to have different instances of the same domain
  concepts;
- **Packages** allow us to group classes that together represent a
  domain or functional concept and work together to perform some task;
- **Methods**, which functionally represent procedures and functions,
  but conceptually should be seen as messages (or better yet,
  commands) that can be issued to a specific type of objects.

## **1990s -- Subject & Aspect Oriented Programming**

During the 1990s Subject Oriented Programming and Aspect Oriented
Programming came to light.

**Subject Oriented Programming** calls for the different representations
of objects, according to who is "_looking_" at it. For example, while
a human might see wood when he looks at a tree, a bird might see an
amount of food and shelter. Translating this to a programming, it means
that object properties and behaviour can be different, depending on who
sends a message to the object (who triggers a method on an object).

**Aspect Oriented Programming** tries to completely separate
cross-cutting concerns from the actual business logic by injecting the
extra code at "compile" time. An _aspect_ is, for example, a method
name. A cross-cutting concern is, for example, logging. Using AOP, we
can simply configure the system to inject code that performs logging
into all methods that comply to a specific pattern, for example,
"_log all calls to methods whose name starts with 'find'_".
( [TYPO3](https://typo3.org/) is an example of a CMS using AOP)

## **Beyond OOP**

After the establishment of OOP, the big focus has been in adjusting
ourselves to programming for the web, evolving existing languages,
creating new languages specialised for web development, developing
frameworks, adjusting the tools and architectures for the massive amount
of requests and data of today.

There were some attempts to evolve the Programming Languages, like
Subject-Oriented Programming (objects behavior is different, depending
on the subject firing the behavior), or Aspect-Oriented Programming
(code injection at compile time), but in essence the programming
language paradigm didn't change much as we still use OOP for most cases,
although functional languages seem to have been gaining some adoption as
of late (maybe a hype?).

## **Conclusion**

The point I am trying to make is that in the first decades of software
development history, programming languages evolved in order to provide
for reusability, but also to prepare software for change (be it changing
the functionality, refactoring or swapping a section of code
completely), they evolved in the direction of **Modularity** (low
coupling) and **Encapsulation** (high cohesion).

As we will see in my next posts, Architecture continues this evolution,
although at a higher level of abstraction.

## **Sources**

1979 -- Trygve Reenskaug --
[MVC](http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~trygver/1979/mvc-2/1979-12-MVC.pdf)

1993 -- Alan C. Kay -- [The Early History of
Smalltalk](http://gagne.homedns.org/~tgagne/contrib/EarlyHistoryST.html)

1993 -- William Harrison, Harold Ossher -- [Subject-Oriented
Programming: A Critique of Pure
Objects](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/bdb2/ed51f2d471c730aea28b3692f63d5c478e0b.pdf)

1997 -- Gregor Kiczales, John Lamping, Anurag Mendhekar, Chris Maeda,
Cristina Videira Lopes, Jean-Marc Loingtier, John Irwin -- [Aspect
Oriented
Programming](http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~gregor/papers/kiczales-ECOOP1997-AOP.pdf)

2005 -- David R. Tribble -- [Go To Statement Considered Harmful: A
Retrospective](http://david.tribble.com/text/goto.html)

2017\* -- Wikipedia -- [Programming
Paradigm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_paradigm)

2018\* -- Wikipedia -- [Simula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simula)
