# Architectural Styles vs. Architectural Patterns vs. Design Patterns

In the last post, I wrote about how programming languages have evolved
and what it tells us: that they evolved always in the direction of
providing for more **modularity** and **encapsulation**.

In the following posts, I will write about Architectural Styles and
Architectural Patterns _evolution_,\sso today I will write about what is
an Architectural Style and what is an Architectural Pattern.

As much terminology in Software Development, these terms are not clear
and different people give it a different meaning. [MSDN says that
Architectural Styles and Architectural Patterns are the same
things](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee658117.aspx),\sbut
personally, I prefer to think of these in the lines of what is explained by
[George Fairbanks and Michael Keeling](http://georgefairbanks.com/blog/architecture-patterns-vs-architectural-styles/),
what is said in this [stack overflow answers](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3958316/whats-the-difference-between-architectural-patterns-and-architectural-styles)
and how [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_software_architecture_styles_and_patterns)
separates the two: the key difference is the **scope**.

It is also important to reinforce the idea that Architectural Styles,
Architectural Patterns and Design Patterns are not mutually exclusive,
they are complementary and they all can teach us something, although, as
usual, they should be used only when needed.

## **Architectural Styles**

Architectural styles tell us, in very broad strokes, how to organise our
code. It's the highest level of granularity and it specifies layers,
high-level modules of the application and how those modules and layers
interact with each other, the relations between them. Examples of
Architectural Styles:

- Component-based
- Monolithic application
- Layered
- Pipes and filters
- Event-driven
- Publish-subscribe
- Plug-ins
- Client-server
- Service-oriented

An Architectural Style can be implemented in various ways, with a
specific technical environment, specific policies, frameworks or
practices.

## **Architectural Patterns**

A pattern is a recurring solution to a recurring problem. In the case of
Architectural Patterns, they solve the problems related to the
Architectural Style. For example, " _what classes will we have and how
will they interact, in order to implement a system with a specific set
of layers_ " _,_ or " _what high-level modules will have in our
Service-Oriented Architecture and how will they communicate_ ", or "
_how many tiers will our Client-server Architecture have_ ".

Architectural Patterns have an extensive impact on the code base, most
often impacting the whole application either horizontally (ie. how to
structure the code inside a layer) or vertically (ie. how a request is
processed from the outer layers into the inner layers and back).
Examples of Architectural Patterns:

- Three-tier
- Microkernel
- Model-View-Controller
- Model-View-ViewModel

## **Design Patterns**

Design Patterns differ from Architectural Patterns in their scope, they
are more localised, they have less impact on the code base, they impact
a specific section of the code base, for example:

- How to instantiate an object when we only know what type needs to be
  instantiated at run time (maybe a Factory Class?);
- How to make an object behave differently according to its state
  (maybe a state machine, or a Strategy Pattern?).

## **Conclusion**

As I mentioned in the beginning of this post, **it's all about the
scope:**

- An Architectural Style is the application design at the highest
  level of abstraction;
- An Architectural Pattern is a way to implement an Architectural
  Style;
- A Design Pattern is a way to solve a localised problem.

Furthermore, a pattern might be able to be used both as an Architectural
Pattern or a Design Pattern, again depending on the scope we use it in,
in a specific project.

## **Sources**

2004 -- Microsoft -- [Understanding Service-Oriented
Architecture](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa480021.aspx)

2009 -- Microsoft -- [Microsoft Application Architecture
Guide](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee658117.aspx)

2010 -- Stack Overflow -- [What's the difference between Arch. Patterns
and Arch.
Styles?](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3958316/whats-the-difference-between-architectural-patterns-and-architectural-styles)

2014 -- George Fairbanks -- [Architecture Patterns vs. Architectural
Styles](http://georgefairbanks.com/blog/architecture-patterns-vs-architectural-styles/)

2017 -- Wikipedia -- [List of software architecture styles and
patterns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_software_architecture_styles_and_patterns)
