# Ports & Adapters Architecture

The [Ports & Adapters
Architecture](http://alistair.cockburn.us/Hexagonal+architecture) (aka
[Hexagonal
Architecture](http://alistair.cockburn.us/Hexagonal+architecture) ) was
thought of by Alistair Cockburn and written down on his blog in 2005.
This is how he defines its goal in one sentence:

> Allow an application to equally be driven by users, programs,
> automated test or batch scripts, and to be developed and tested in
> isolation from its eventual run-time devices and databases.

> Alistair Cockburn 2005, [Ports and
> Adapters](http://alistair.cockburn.us/Hexagonal+architecture)

I've seen some articles talking about the Ports & Adapters Architecture
that said a lot about layers. However, I haven't read anything about
layers in the original Alistair Cockburn post.

The idea is to think about our application as the central artefact of a
system, where all input and output reaches/leaves the application
through a port that isolates the application from external tools,
technologies and delivery mechanisms. The application should have no
knowledge of who/what is sending input or receiving its output. This is
intended to provide some protection against the evolution of technology
and business requirements, which can make products obsolete shortly
after they are developed, because of technology/vendor lock-down.

In this post, I'm going to dive into the following subjects:

- [The problems of the traditional
  approach](#problems-of-the-traditional-approach)

- [Evolving from the Layered
  Architecture](#evolving-from-the-layered-architecture)

- - [What is a Port?](#what-is-a-port)

  - [What is an Adapter?](#what-is-an-adapter)

  - - [Two different types of
      adapters](#different-types-of-adapters)

- [What are the benefits?](#benefits)

- - [Implementation and technology
    isolation](#implementation-and-technology-isolation)
  - [Delivery mechanisms isolation](#delivery-mechanisms-isolation)
  - [Testing](#testing)

- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

**The problems of the traditional approach**

The traditional approach will likely bring us problems both on the
front-end side and on the backend side.

On the front-end side we end up having leakage of business logic into
the UI (ie. when we put use case logic in a controller or view, making
it unreusable in other UI screens) or even leakage of the UI into the
business logic (ie. when we create methods in our entities because of
some logic we need in a template).

![Hexagonal Arch - 5 -
traditional](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/hexagonal-arch-5-traditional2.png?w=415&h=313)

On the back-end side, we can have leakage of the external libraries and
technologies into the business logic because we might end up referencing
them directly by type hinting, subclassing, or even instantiating the
libraries classes inside our business logic.

## **Evolving from the Layered Architecture**

By 2005, thanks to [EBI](ch08.md) and [DDD](ch10.md), we
knew already that **what is really relevant in the system are the inner
layers** . Those layers are the ones where all the business logic lives
(or should live), they are the real differential to our competitors.
That is the real "application".

![Hexagonal Arch - 1 - outer layers
similarity](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/hexagonal-arch-1-outer-layers-similarity.png?w=329&h=150)

But at some point, Alistair Cockburn realised that **the top and bottom
layers, on the other hand, were simply entry/exit points to/from the
application** . Although they are actually different, they have
nevertheless very similar objectives and there is symmetry in the
design. Moreover, if we want to isolate our application inner layers, we
can do it using those entry/exit points, in a similar fashion.

![Hexagonal Arch - 2 -
left-right](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/hexagonal-arch-2-left-right6.png?w=339&h=273)

To escape the typical layering diagram, we will represent this two sides
of the system as left and right, instead of top and bottom.

Although we can identify two symmetrical sides of the application,
**each side can have several entry/exit points** . For example, an API
and an UI are two different entry/exit points on our left side of the
application, while an ORM and a search engine are two different
entry/exit points on the right side of our application. To represent
that our application has several entry/exit points, we will draw our
application diagram with several sides. **The diagram could have been
any polygon with several sides**,\sbut the choice turned out to be a
hexagon. Hence the name "Hexagonal Architecture".

![Hexagonal Arch - 3 -
hexagon](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/hexagonal-arch-3-hexagon2.png?w=375&h=342)

The [Ports & Adapters
Architecture](http://alistair.cockburn.us/Hexagonal+architecture) solves
the problems identified earlier by using an abstraction layer,
implemented as a port and an adapter.

### What is a Port?

A port is a consumer agnostic entry and exit point to/from the
application. In many languages, it will be an interface. For example, it
can be an interface used to perform searches in a search engine. In our
application, we will use this interface as an entry and/or exit point
with no knowledge of the concrete implementation that will actually be
injected where the interface is defined as a type hint.

### What is an Adapter?

An adapter is a class that transforms (adapts) an interface into
another.

For example, an adapter implements an interface A and gets injected an
interface B. When the adapter is instantiated it gets injected in its
constructor an object that implements interface B. This adapter is then
injected wherever interface A is needed and receives method requests
that it transforms and proxies to the inner object that implements
interface B.

If I managed to confuse you, no worries, I give a more concrete example
further below. 🙂

#### Two different types of adapters

The adapters on the left side, representing the UI, are called the
**Primary** or **Driving Adapters** because they are the ones to start
some action on the application, while the adapters on the right side,
representing the connections to the backend tools, are called the
**Secondary** or **Driven Adapters** because they always react to an
action of a primary adapter.

There is also a difference on how the ports/adapters are used:

- On the **left side**,\sthe adapter depends on the port and gets
  injected a concrete implementation of the port, which contains the
  use case. On this side, **both the port and its concrete
  implementation (the use case) belong inside the application** ;
- On the **right side**,\sthe adapter **is** the concrete
  implementation of the port and is injected in our business logic
  although our business logic only knows about the interface. On this
  side, **the port belongs inside the application, but its concrete
  implementation belongs outside** and it wraps around some external
  tool.

![Hexagonal Arch - 4 -
ports-adapters](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/hexagonal-arch-4-ports-adapters2.png?w=1100)

## **What are the benefits?**

Using this port/adapter design, with our application in the centre of
the system, allows us to keep the application isolated from the
implementation details like ephemeral technologies, tools and delivery
mechanisms, making it easier and faster to test and to create a reusable
proof of concept.

### Implementation and technology isolation

#### Context

We have an application that uses SOLR as a search engine and we use an
open source library to connect to it and perform searches.

#### Traditional approach

Using a traditional approach, we will use that library classes directly
in our code base, as type hints, instances and/or superclasses of our
implementations.

#### Ports and adapters approach

Using ports and adapters we will create an interface, let's call it
UserSearchInterface, which we will use in our code when needed as a type
hint. We will also create the adapter for SOLR, which will implement
that interface, let's name it UserSearchSolrAdapter. This
implementation is a wrapper for the SOLR library, so it gets the library
injected and uses it to implement the methods specified in the
interface.

#### Problem

At some point, we want to switch from SOLR to Elasticsearch. Moreover,
for the same search, sometimes we want to use SOLR and other times we
want to use Elasticsearch, with that decision being made at runtime.

If we used the traditional approach, we will have to search and replace
the usage of the SOLR library for the Elasticsearch library. However,
that is not a simple search and replace: the libraries have different
ways of being used, different methods with different inputs and outputs,
so replacing the libraries will not be a trivial task. And using one
library instead of another one, at runtime, won't even be possible.

However, if we used Ports & Adapters, we just need to create a new
adapter, let's name it UserSearchElasticsearchAdapter, and inject it
instead of the SOLR adapter, maybe just by changing a config in the DIC.
To inject a different implementation at run time, we can use a Factory
to decide which adapter to inject.

### Delivery mechanisms isolation

In a similar fashion to the previous example, let's say we have an
application that needs a web GUI, a CLI and a web API. We also have some
functionality that we want to make available in all three UIs, let's
call that functionality _UserProfileUpdate_.

Using Ports & Adapters, we would implement this functionality in an
application service method and think of it as a use case. This service
would implement an interface specifying the methods, inputs and outputs.

Each UI version would then have a controller (or console command) that
would use that interface to trigger the logic desired and would be
injected with the concrete implementation of the service. Here, the
Adapter is actually the controller (or CLI Command).

We could then completely change the UI knowing that we would not affect
the business logic.

### Testing

In both the previous examples, testing becomes easier with Ports and
Adapters Architecture. In the first examples, we can mock or stub the
interface (Port) and test our application without using SOLR nor
Elasticsearch.

In the second example, we can test all the UIs in isolation from our
application, and our use cases in isolation from the UI by simply giving
our service some input and asserting the results.

## **Conclusion**

The way I see it, Ports & Adapters Architecture has only one **goal:
isolate the business logic from the delivery mechanisms and tools used
by the system** . And it does so by using a common programming language
construct: _interfaces_.

On the **UI** side (the driving adapters), we create **adapters that use
our application interfaces**,\sie. controllers.

On the **infrastructure** side (the driven adapters), we create
**adapters that implement our application interfaces**,\sie.
repositories.

That's all there really is to it!

It is, though, curious to note that this same idea
[was already published 13 years before](ch08.md),
although not explicitly emphasising the objective of isolating the tools
and delivery mechanisms from the core of the application.

![Ivar Jacobson 1992, pp.
171](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/04/fig_7_14_boundaries.jpg?w=486&h=402)

Any interaction of the system with an actor goes through a Boundary
object. As Jacobson describes, an actor can be a human user like a
customer or an administrator (operator), but it might also be a
non-human "user" like an alarm or a printer, which corresponds to the
_Driving Adapters_ and _Driven Adapters_ of Ports & Adapters
Architecture.

## **Sources**

1992 -- Ivar Jacobson -- [Object-Oriented Software Engineering: A use
case driven
approach](https://www.amazon.com/Object-Oriented-Software-Engineering-Driven-Approach/dp/0201403471)

200? -- Alistair Cockburn -- [Hexagonal
Architecture](http://wiki.c2.com/?HexagonalArchitecture)

2005 -- Alistair Cockburn -- [Ports and
Adapters](http://alistair.cockburn.us/Hexagonal+architecture)

2012 -- Benjamin Eberlei -- [OOP Business Applications: Entity,
Boundary,
Interactor](https://beberlei.de/2012/08/13/oop_business_applications_entity_boundary_interactor.html)

2014 -- Fideloper -- [Hexagonal
Architecture](http://fideloper.com/hexagonal-architecture)

2014 -- Philip Brown -- [What is Hexagonal
Architecture?](http://culttt.com/2014/12/31/hexagonal-architecture/)

2014 -- Jan Stenberg -- [Exploring the Hexagonal
Architecture](https://www.infoq.com/news/2014/10/exploring-hexagonal-architecture)

2017 -- Grzegorz Ziemoński -- [Hexagonal Architecture Is
Powerful](https://dzone.com/articles/hexagonal-architecture-is-powerful)

2017 -- Shamik Mitra -- [Hello, Hexagonal
Architecture](https://dzone.com/articles/hello-hexagonal-architecture-1)
