# Event-Driven Architecture

Using events to design applications is a practice that seems to be
around since the late 1980s. We can use events anywhere in the frontend
or backend. When a button is pressed, when some data changes or some
backend action is performed.

But what is it exactly? When should we use it and how? What are the
downsides?

## **What/When/Why**

Just like classes, components should have low coupling between them but
be high cohesive within them. When components need to collaborate, let's
say a component "A" needs to trigger some logic in component "B", the
natural way to do it is simply to have component A call a method in an
object of component B. However, if A knows about the existence of B,
they are coupled, A depends on B, making the system more difficult to
change and maintain. Events can be used to **prevent coupling**.

Furthermore, as a side effect of using events and having decoupled
components, if we have a team working only on component B, it can change
how component B reacts to logic in component A without even talking to
the team responsible for component A. Components can evolve
independently: **our application becomes more organic**.

Even within the same component, sometimes we have code that needs to be
executed as a result of an action, but it doesn't need to be executed
immediately, in the same request/response. The most flagrant example is
sending out an email. In this case, we can immediately return a response
to the user and send out the email at a later time, in an **async**
fashion and avoid having the user waiting for an email to be sent.

Nevertheless, there are dangers to it. If we use it indiscriminately, we
run the risk of ending up with logic flows that are conceptually highly
cohesive but wired up together by events which are a decoupling
mechanism. In other words, code that should be together will be
separated and will be difficult to track its flow (kind of like the
_goto_ statement), to understand it and reason about it: It will be
spaghetti code!

To prevent turning our codebase into a big pile of spaghetti code, we
should keep the usage of events limited to clearly identified
situations. In my experience, there are three cases in which to use
events:

1.  To decouple components
2.  To perform async tasks
3.  To keep track of state changes (audit log)

### 1. To decouple components

When component A performs the logic that needs to trigger the component
B logic, instead of calling it directly, we can trigger an event sending
into an event dispatcher. Component B will be listening to that specific
event in the dispatcher and will act whenever the event occurs.

This means that both A and B will be depending on the dispatcher and the
event, but they will have no knowledge of each other: they will be
decoupled.

Ideally, both the dispatcher and the event should live in neither
component:

- The dispatcher should be a library completely independent of our
  application and therefore installed in a generic location using a
  dependency management system. In PHP world, this is something
  installed in the _vendor_ folder, using [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/).
- The event, nevertheless, is part of our application but should live
  outside both components as to keep them unaware of each other. The
  event is shared between the components and it is part of the core of
  the application. Events are part of what DDD calls the **Shared
  Kernel** . This way, both components will depend on the Shared
  Kernel but will remain unaware of each other.\
  Nevertheless, in a Monolithic application, for convenience, it is
  acceptable to place it in the component that triggers the event.

> Shared Kernel
>
> \[...\] Designate with an explicit boundary some subset of the domain
> model that the teams agree to share. Keep this kernel small. \[...\]
> This explicitly shared stuff has special status, and shouldn't be
> changed without consultation with the other team.
>
> Eric Evans 2014, [Domain-Driven Design
> Reference](https://www.amazon.com/Domain-Driven-Design-Reference-Definitions-Summaries/dp/1457501198)

### 2. To perform async tasks

Sometimes we have a piece of logic that we want to have executed, but it
might take quite some time executing and we don't want to keep the user
waiting for it to finish. In such a case, it is desirable to have it run
as an async job and immediately return a message to the user informing
him that his request will be executed later, asynchronously.

For example, placing an order in a webshop could be done in sync, but
sending an email notifying the user could be done async.

In such cases, what we can do is trigger an event that will be queued,
and will sit in the queue until a worker can pick it up and execute it
whenever the system has resources for it.

In these cases, it doesn't really matter if the associated logic is in
the same bounded context or not, either way, the logic is decoupled.

### 3. To keep track of state changes (audit log)

In the traditional way of storing data, we have entities holding some
data. When the data in those entities change, we simply update a DB
table row to reflect the new values.

The problem here is that we do not store exactly what changed and when.

We can store events containing the changes, in an _audit log_ kind of
construction.

More about this further ahead, in the explanation about _Event Sourcing_.

## Listeners Vs Subscribers

A common debate to have when implementing an event driven architecture
is whether to use event listeners or event subscribers, so let's clarify
my take on that:

1.  **Event Listeners** react to only one event and can have multiple
    methods reacting to it. So we should name the listener following the
    event name, for example if we have a "_UserRegisteredEvent_" we
    will have a "_UserRegisteredEventListener_" this will make it easy
    to know, without even looking inside the file, to what event that
    listener is listening to. The methods (reactions) to the event
    should reflect what the method actually does, for example "
    _notifyNewUserAboutHisAccount()_ " and "
    _notifyAdminThatNewUserHasRegistered()_ ". This should be the usual
    approach for most cases, as it keeps the listener small and focused
    on the single responsibility of reacting to a specific event.
    Furthermore, if we have a componentized architecture, each component
    (if needed) would have its own listener to an event that could be
    triggered from multiple locations.
2.  **Event Subscribers** react to multiple events and have multiple
    methods reacting to them. The naming of the subscriber is more
    difficult as it can not be ad-hoc, nevertheless the subscriber
    should still comply with the Single Responsibility Principle, so the
    name of the subscriber needs to reflect its single intent. Using
    event subscribers should be a less common approach, especially in
    components, as it can easily break the single responsibility
    principle. An example of a good use case for an event subscriber is
    to manage transactions, more concretely we could have an event
    subscriber named "_RequestTransactionSubscriber_" reacting to
    events like "_RequestReceivedEvent_", "_ResponseSentEvent_" and
    "_KernelExceptionEvent_", and bind to them the start, commit and
    rollback of transactions, respectively, each in their own method
    like "_startTransaction()_", "_finishTransaction()_" and "
    _rollbackTransaction()_ ". This would be a subscriber reacting to
    multiple events but still focusing on the single responsibility of
    managing the request transaction.

## **Patterns**

Martin Fowler identifies three different types of event patterns:

- Event Notification
- Event-Carried State Transfer
- Event-Sourcing

All of these patterns share the same key concepts:

1.  Events communicate that something has happened (they occur [ after
2.  Events are broadcasted to any code that is listening ( [ several ] code units can react to an
    event).

### Event Notification

Let's suppose we have an application core with clearly defined
components. Ideally, those components are completely decoupled from each
other but, some of their functionality requires some **logic in other
components to be [ executed ]**.

This is the most typical case, which was described earlier: When
component A performs the logic that needs to trigger the component B
logic, instead of calling it directly, it triggers an event sending it
to an event dispatcher. Component B will be listening to that specific
event in the dispatcher and will act whenever the event occurs.

It is important to note that, a characteristic of this pattern is that
**the event carries minimal data** . It carries only enough data for the
listener to know what happened and carry out their code, usually just
entity ID(s) and maybe the date and time that the event was created.

- #### Advantages

  - Greater resilience, if the events are queued the origin
    component can perform its logic even if the secondary logic can
    not be performed at that moment because of a bug (since they are
    queued, they can be executed later, when the bug is fixed);
  - Reduced latency, if the event is queued the user does not need
    to wait for that logic to be executed;
  - Teams can evolve the components independently, making their work
    easier, faster, less prone to problems, and more organic;

- #### Disadvantages

  - If used without criteria, it has the potential to transform the
    codebase in a pile of spaghetti code.

### Event-Carried State Transfer

Let's consider again the previous example of an application core with
clearly defined components. This time, for some of their functionality,
they **need from other components**.
The most natural way of getting that data is to ask the
other components for it, but that means the querying component will know
about the queried component: the components will be coupled to each
other!

Another way of sharing this data is by using events that are triggered
when the component that owns the data, changes it. **The event will
carry the whole new version of the data** with them. The Components
interested in that data will be listening to those events and will react
to them by storing a local copy of that data. This way, when they need
that external data, they will have it locally, they will not need to
query the other component for it.

- #### Advantages

  - Greater resilience, since the querying components can function
    if the queried component becomes unavailable (either because
    there is a bug or the remote server is unreachable);
  - Reduced latency, as there's no remote call (when the queried
    component is remote) required to access the data;
  - We don't have to worry about load on the queried component to
    satisfy queries from all the querying components (especially if
    it's a remote component);

- #### Disadvantages

  - There will be several copies of the same data, although they
    will be read-only copies and data storage is not a problem
    nowadays;
  - Higher complexity of the querying component, as it will need the
    logic to maintain a local copy of the external data although
    this is pretty standard logic.

Maybe this pattern is not necessary if both components execute in the
same process, which makes for fast communication between components, but
even then it might be interesting to use it for decoupling and
maintainability sake or as a preparation for decoupling those components
into different microservices, sometime in the future. It all depends on
what are our current needs, future needs and how far we want/need to go
with decoupling.

### Event Sourcing

Let's assume an Entity in its initial state. Being an Entity, it has its
own identity, it's a specific thing in the real world, which the
application is modelling. Along its lifetime, the Entity data changes
and, traditionally, the current state of the entity is simply stored as
a row in a DB.

#### Transaction log

This is fine for most cases, but what happens if we need to know how the
Entity reached that state (ie. we want to know the credits and debits of
our bank account)? It's not possible because we only store the current
state!

Using event sourcing, instead of storing the Entity state, we focus on
storing the Entity state **changes** and **computing the Entity state**
from those changes. Each state change is an event, stored in an event
stream (ie. a table in an RDBMS). When we need the current state of an
Entity, we calculate it from all of its events in the event stream.

> The event store becomes the principal source of truth, and the system
> state is purely derived from it. For programmers, the best example of
> this is a version-control system. The log of all the commits is the
> event store and the working copy of the source tree is the system
> state.
>
> Greg Young 2010, [CQRS
> Documents](https://cqrs.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/cqrs_documents.pdf)

#### Deletions

If we have a state change (event) that is a mistake, we can not simply
delete that event because that would change the state change history,
and it would go against the whole idea of doing event sourcing. Instead,
we create an event, in the event stream, that reverses the event that we
would like to delete. This process is called a Reversal Transaction, and
not only brings the Entity back to the desired state but also _leaves a
trail that shows that the object had been in that state at a given point
in time_.

> There are also architectural benefits to not deleting data. The
> storage system becomes an additive only architecture, it is well known
> that append-only architectures distribute more easily than
> updating architectures because there are far fewer locks to deal with.
>
> Greg Young 2010, [CQRS
> Documents](https://cqrs.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/cqrs_documents.pdf)

#### Snapshots

However, when we have many events in an event stream, computing an
Entity state will be costly, it will not be performant. To solve this,
every X amount of events we will create a snapshot of the Entity state
at that point in time. This way, when we need the entity state, we only
need to calculate it up to the last snapshot. Hell, we can even keep a
permanently updated snapshot of the Entity, that way we have the best of
both worlds.

![2006 - 2 - Event
Sourcing](https://herbertograca.files.wordpress.com/2017/07/2006-2-event-sourcing.png?w=1100)

#### Projections

In event sourcing, we also have the concept of a **projection**, which
is the computation of the events in an event stream, from and to
specific moments. This means that a snapshot, or the current state of an
entity, fits the definition of a projection. But the most valuable idea
in the concept of projections, is that we can analyse the "behaviour" of
Entities during specific periods of time, which allows us to make
educated guesses about the future (ie. if in the past 5 years an Entity
had increased activity during August, it's likely that next August the
same will happen), and this can be an extremely valuable capability for
the business.

#### Pros and cons

Event sourcing can be very useful for both the business and the
development process:

- we query these events, useful both for business and for development
  to understand the users and system behaviour (debugging);
- we can also use the event log to reconstruct past states, again
  useful both for business and for development;
- automatically adjust the state to cope with retroactive changes,
  great for business;
- explore alternative histories by injecting hypothetical events when
  replaying, awesome for business.

But not everything is good news, be aware of hidden problems:

- #### External updates

  When our events trigger updates in external systems, we do not want
  to retrigger those events when we are replaying the events in order
  to create a projection. At this point, we can simply disable the
  external updates when we are in "replay mode", maybe encapsulating
  that logic in a gateway.\
  Another solution, depending on the actual problem, might be to
  buffer the updates to external systems, performing them after a
  certain amount of time, when it is safe to assume that the events
  will not be replayed.

- #### External Queries

  When our events use a query to an external system, ie. getting stock
  bonds ratings, what happens when we are replaying the events in
  order to create a projection? We might want to get the same ratings
  that were used when the events were run for the first time, maybe
  years ago. So either the remote application can give us those values
  or we need to store them in our system so we can simulate the remote
  query, again, by encapsulating that logic in the gateway.

- #### Code Changes

  Martin Fowler identifies 3 types of code changes: _new features_,
  _bug fixes_, and _temporal logic_ . The real problem comes when
  replaying events which should be played with different business
  logic rules at different moments in time, ie. last year tax
  calculations are different than this year. As usual, conditional
  logic can be used but it will become messy, so the advice it to use
  a strategy pattern instead.

So, I advise caution, and I follow these rules whenever possible:

- Keep events dumb, knowing only about the state change and not how it
  was decided. That way we can safely replay any event and expect the
  result to be the same even if the business rules have changed in the
  meantime (although we will need to keep the legacy business rules so
  we can apply them when replaying past events);
- Interactions with external systems should not depend on these
  events, this way we can safely replay events without the danger of
  retriggering external logic and we don't need to ensure the reply
  from the external system is the same as when the event was played
  originally.

And, of course, like any other pattern, we don't need to use it
everywhere, we should use it where it makes sense, where it brings us an
advantage and solves more problems than it creates.

## **Conclusion**

It's, again, mostly about encapsulation, low coupling and high cohesion.

Events can leverage tremendous benefits to the maintainability,
performance and growth of the codebase, but, with event sourcing, also
to the reliability and information that the system data can provide.

Nevertheless, it's a path with its own dangers because both the
conceptual and technical complexity increase and a misuse in either of
them can have disastrous outcomes.

## **Sources**

2005 • Martin Fowler • [Event
Sourcing](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html)

2006 • Martin Fowler • [Focusing on
Events](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventNarrative.html)

2010 • Greg Young • [CQRS
Documents](https://cqrs.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/cqrs_documents.pdf)

2014 • Greg Young • [CQRS and Event Sourcing -- Code on the Beach
2014](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHGkaShoyNs)

2014 • Eric Evans • [Domain-Driven Design
Reference](https://www.amazon.com/Domain-Driven-Design-Reference-Definitions-Summaries/dp/1457501198)

2017 • Martin Fowler • [What do you mean by
"Event-Driven"?](https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701-event-driven.html)

2017 • Martin Fowler • [The Many Meanings of Event-Driven
Architecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=STKCRSUsyP0)
