# Resource-Method-Representation

MVC was created in 1979, in a context of desktop applications with CLI
user interfaces and it implied that the UI would be changed
automatically if there were changes in the database, caused by some
factor external to the user. The same pattern was perfectly usable later
on desktop applications with a GUI.

However, its usage in web applications has always been an adaptation
because most web applications don't change the UI as a consequence of
changes that happen in the server side, there is always a call from the
UI asking the server side for an update of the screen.

I have talked about [variants of the MVC pattern
before](ch07.md) ,
this post is about another variant: **_Resource-Method-Representation_**
.

I feel the need to talk about it, not because I find it a key pattern in
my practice but because of the misconception that it is the same as the
ADR pattern, of which I will write about soon.

## 2008 -- Resource-Method-Representation

The **RMR** pattern was created by Paul James in 2008 and it adapts the
MVC pattern to the context of REST APIs.

### Resource

The idea is that the Entities are modelled as REST resources (the first
R in the pattern name), with its only public methods mapping to an HTTP
method:

### Method

When a request is made to the API, it is routed to one of these business
objects, the Resources, and the method that is called on this resource
corresponds to the HTTP method of the request. This method on this
business object is then responsible for returning a complete _http_
response including its status code and headers.

### Representation

The representation is the Resource representation in a format chosen by
the API or requested by the client, ie. JSON, XML, etc.. This
representation is the content of the response created by the Method and
sent back to the client if/when there is any content to be sent back.

### My take on this pattern

The MVC pattern is a presentation pattern, it is a way of separating the
model, the domain, from the user interface. That was, and is, the main
goal of MVC.

The RMR pattern, however, goes beyond that. It tells us how to design
our business objects, our domain entities. More than that, it tells us
that our domain entities should reflect the delivery mechanism: the HTTP
methods.

This means that this is not just a presentation pattern, it is an
architectural pattern as it impacts all layers of the application. It
also means that an application built using this pattern is not
domain-centric, it is HTTP-centric. Our entities end up having methods
reflecting the delivery mechanism instead of domain actions.

I think it might be possible to use this pattern successfully to build
small APIs, but I don't think it can be used for enterprise applications
as I believe that enterprise applications require a Domain Driven Design
approach, and therefore a domain-centric software development strategy.

Furthermore, I totally agree with Anthony Ferrara when he says:

> Not to mention that it couples itself to HTTP so tightly that to try
> to map it to a CLI or GUI interface would be quite difficult.
>
> Anthony Ferrara 2014, [Alternatives To
> MVC](https://blog.ircmaxell.com/2014/11/alternatives-to-mvc.html#RMR-Resource-Method-Representation)

## **Sources**

2008 -- Paul James -- [Introducing the RMR Web
Architecture](http://www.peej.co.uk/articles/rmr-architecture.html)

2014 -- Anthony Ferrara -- [Alternatives To
MVC](https://blog.ircmaxell.com/2014/11/alternatives-to-mvc.html)
